Displaying a menu
1. Point to the relevant Move the pointer over the window or icon
icon you want to work on.
For example, move the pointer over the
Applications disc 1 directory window.
2. Click on the middle The menu will be displayed.
mouse button
Note that the menu will change to apply to an
individual file in a directory window, if the
pointer is over the file name, or if you have
previously selected its icon by clicking on it.
Choosing from a menu
1. Select the menu item Move the pointer over the menu item you
you want want and click the select (LH) button.
The action requested will occur.
For example, point at the Select all option on the
Filer menu and click select.
The file icons in the directory window will all be
highlighted. Repeat the process, choosing Clear
selection to reverse it.
Use the adjust (RH) button if you want the
menu to stay on the screen - otherwise it will
disappear when you press the button.
Menus 38

Displaying a menu
1. Point to the relevant Move the pointer over the window or icon
icon you want to work on.
For example, move the pointer over the
Applications disc 1 directory window.
2. Click on the middle The menu will be displayed.
mouse button
Note that the menu will change to apply to an
individual file in a directory window, if the
pointer is over the file name, or if you have
previously selected its icon by clicking on it.
Choosing from a menu
1. Select the menu item Move the pointer over the menu item you
you want want and click the select (LH) button.
The action requested will occur.
For example, point at the Select all option on the
Filer menu and click select.
The file icons in the directory window will all be
highlighted. Repeat the process, choosing Clear
selection to reverse it.
Use the adjust (RH) button if you want the
menu to stay on the screen - otherwise it will
disappear when you press the button.
Menus 38

Copyright © Acorn Computers Limited 1988
Neither the whole nor any part of the information contained in, nor the
product described in this Guide may be adapted or reproduced in any
material form except with the prior written approval of Acorn Computers
Limited.
The products described in this manual are subject to continuous development
and improvement. All information of a technical nature and particulars of the
products and their use (including the information and particulars in this
Guide) are given by Acorn Computers Limited in good faith. However, Acorn
Computers Limited cannot accept any liability for any loss or damage arising
from the use of any information or particulars in this manual, or any incorrect
use of the products. All maintenance and service on the products must be
carried out by Acorn Computers' authorised dealers. Acorn Computers
Limited can accept no liability whatsoever for any loss or damage caused by
service, maintenance or repair by unauthorised personnel.
All correspondence should be addressed to:
Customer Support and Service
Acorn Computers Limited
Fulbourn Road
Cherry Hinton
Cambridge CB1 4JN
Information can also be obtained from the Acorn Support Information
Database (SID). This is a direct dial viewdata system available to registered
SID users. Initially, access SID on Cambridge (0223) 243642: this will allow
you to inspect the system and use a response frame for registration.
ACORN, ARCHIMEDES and ECONET are trademarks of Acorn Computers
Limited.
Within this publication, the term 'BBC' is used as an abbreviation for 'British
Broadcasting Corporation'.
Edition 2
First published 1988
Published by Acorn Computers Limited
ISBN 1 85250 055 7
Part number 0483,000
Issue 1
1

2

Welcome to the Archimedes
personal workstation
This guide introduces your new Archimedes personal workstation.
It explains how to connect it together and how to start using it.
It doesn't matter if you've never used a computer before - the
Archimedes system is easy to use, and you need learn only a few
simple techniques and terms to get going. You can pick up the
details as you go along.
Once you've set up the sytem and mastered the techniques
described in this guide, the User Guide will help you to get the best
out of your Archimedes system and answer many other questions
you may have.
Welcome to Archimedes 3

About this Guide
This Guide is an introduction to the Archimedes personal workstation for the first-time user, and is
divided into the following chapters:
Unpacking Describes the parts which make up the Archimedes computer. 5
Check the contents of the box to make sure you have everything.
Setting up the computer Explains how to connect everything together. 7
Getting started Tells you how to turn the computer on and describes the display 11
on the screen.
The Archimedes desktop Introduces the desktop facilities, explained in greater detail in 13
later chapters.
Using the mouse Describes what the mouse does and how you use it. 17
Disc drives Tells you about the floppy and hard discs used with Archimedes 23
computers.
Windows Explains the special features of the screen display. 27
Menus Explains how to select items from lists (menus) displayed on the 37
screen.
Using the keyboard Introduces the keyboard and some of its features. 41
Files & directories Introduces the Archimedes desktop filing system. 45
Outside the desktop Tells you how to enter *commands direct to the operating 51
system (this chapter will be of interest to computer users with some
experience).
If things go wrong Offers solutions to some common problems you might encounter. 53
Glossary Lists computer jargon used in the Welcome Guide and explains 55
its meaning. Each term in the Glossary is highlighted in italics the first
time it is used in the text.
If you want to know more about any particular part of the
Archimedes system, turn to the User Guide.
About this guide 4

Unpacking
This section tells you about unpacking your Archimedes system, lists the items which should be in the box when you
receive it, and helps you choose a spot where you can set it up.
Unpacking Unpack your Archimedes system on a flat surface - a large table where there's plenty of
room for the box as well as for the computer is best. Take all the pieces out of the box,
making sure you don't break the foam packing material, as you may need this later.
Checklist Check that you have all these components, and that they've arrived in good condition:
Unpacking 5

You'll probably have bought a monitor (with mains lead) and connecting cable at the
same time.
If you don't have all of these parts, or if any of them is damaged, notify your supplier
immediately.
Fill in the registration form and post it back to Acorn Computers, so that you can be
informed of developments and updates to your Archimedes computer. This will help
us to ensure that you get the best from your computer in the future.
Put all the packing back into the box and put it away somewhere safe. If you ever
want to transport your Archimedes system, it is best to use the box, even if you only
take it a short distance in a car. If you ever have to take it back to your dealer, too,
you'll have to pack it back into the original box.
Choosing where to put You'll probably want to put your computer on a table or a desk. Bear the
your computer following points in mind when deciding exactly where to situate it:
• you'll need a firm, flat surface with enough space at one side to move the mouse
around, and space at the other side for manuals and papers you may be working
on.
• don't place the computer where it will be exposed to direct sunlight, or any other
source of heat, such as a radiator.
• if you have any peripheral equipment (such as a printer) you'll need space nearby
for that too.
• sunlight or reflections from a window might make the screen difficult to see.
There must also be an accessible 13 amp power point within 1.5 metres of the
computer.
Unpacking 6

Setting up the computer
This chapter describes how to connect the components of the computer together and set it up ready for use.
Before you start connecting it up, please read the Guidelines for safe operation in the front of the
User Guide.
After you've checked the components against the checklist in the last section, you can
connect them together and begin to use your Archimedes computer.
Follow these simple steps to set up your computer:
1. Connect mouse to Take the mouse and the keyboard out of
keyboard their plastic bags. The mouse has a straight
cable with a plug on the end of it. This goes
into the socket at the back of the keyboard. The
plug has an arrow moulded into it. This should
be uppermost when you push it in. The plug
won't go in any other way, so don't try to force
it in.
2. Connect keyboard The keyboard has a curly cable with a
to computer plug on the end of it. Plug this into the socket
on the front right hand side of the computer
unit (just below the disc drive slot), with the
arrow uppermost: don't force it. Place the
keyboard in front of the computer.
Setting up the computer
7

3. Connect monitor to Put the monitor on top of the computer
computer (unless it weighs 15 kg or more, like the 19-
inch high-resolution monitor which can be
used for 400-series machines, in which case it
will have to go alongside, or on a strong shelf
above).
Colour monitors If you have a colour monitor, it will have a
cable with different connectors at either end.
Push the big plug into the back of the monitor,
and the small plug into the socket on the back
of the computer marked ANALOGUE RGB.
Both plugs and sockets are wider at the top
than at the bottom, so it isn't possible to put
them in the wrong way up. Secure the
connector to the computer with a small flat-
bladed screwdriver.
Standard-resolution If you have a standard-resolution
monochrome monochrome monitor for a 300-series
machine, it will have a cable with round plugs
on either end. Push one plug into the socket on
the back of the computer unit marked MONO
VIDEO, and the other into the socket marked
VIDEO IN on the back of the monitor.
Note - if you want to connect anything else to
your computer (like a monochrome monitor to
a 400-series machine, a printer or Econet
network), go to the end of this chapter now.
Setting up the computer

4. Connect mains If your monitor has an IEC-type mains
supply plug, plug this into the socket marked
UNSWITCHED 0/P 220-240V on the back of
the computer. If it has a normal mains plug,
plug this directly into the mains.
Finally, plug the connector on the mains cable
into the socket marked I/P 220240V on the
back of the computer unit.
Check that the computer is switched off (see
the next chapter). Connect the plug to the
mains and switch the mains on.
Connecting other things
Alternative monitors Connect a high-resolution monochrome monitor
to a 400-series machine with two leads (having
BNC twist-lock connectors at either end)
connected to the sockets marked VIDEO and
SYNC on the back of the computer.
If you want to connect a standard-resolution
monochrome monitor to a 400-series machine,
some internal adjustments to your computer
will be necessary consult your supplier for
advice.
Setting up the computer 9

Peripherals Peripherals should also be connected to the computer before the power is
switched on:
• If you have a parallel printer, connect it to the socket at the back of the
computer marked PARALLEL PRINTER. Connect a modem or a serial
printer to the socket marked SERIAL PORT.
• If you have an Econet network, connect your Archimedes computer to the
network using the socket marked ECONET. You will also need to install
an Econet module inside the computer (instructions on installing it come
with the module).
To continue connecting up your Archimedes system, go back to step 4 now.
Setting up the computer 10

Getting started
This chapter tells you how to switch on the computer and what you see on the screen when you do.
1. Equipment check First check that all parts of the computer have been properly connected together, as
described in the previous chapter.
2. Switch on the monitor The monitor has a separate switch. The manual for your monitor will explain
how to turn it on and, if necessary, adjust the brightness control.
3. Switch on the Press the rocker switch on
computer the back of the computer:
0 is Off
I is On
The Archimedes desktop will appear on the screen, looking something like this:
Getting started 11

Introducing icons The little pictures in the lower margin of the screen represent the facilities available.
They are called icons. The area they occupy is the icon bar. Icons are described in the
next section.
The pointer The arrow on the screen is the pointer. It is used to indicate items you want to use or
move.
The pointer moves around the screen as you move the mouse. The mouse moves best
over a firm, flat surface. Try moving the mouse to see how the pointer moves.
As soon as the desktop has appeared on the screen, you can begin working. It is
better, though, to read the next section, which explains briefly the principles of the
Archimedes desktop and its components.
Getting started 12

The Archimedes desktop
This section describes the appearance of the desktop, the principles of the window system and how to use the
desktop features.
The desktop When you first switch on the computer, the desktop is normally displayed on the
screen. This is your working area. At first it is clear, except for the icon bar. As you
perform tasks and use applications, items will be added to the desktop. You can move
them around the desktop as you wish, change their size, hide and remove them to
make room for others.
The Archimedes desktop and windows system is easy to use because you don't have to
remember long, complicated commands. When you see what you want you just point
at it, using the mouse, and select it.
The Archimedes desktop 13

The important features of the Archimedes desktop system are windows, icons, the
mouse and menus.
Windows A window is an area of the screen allocated for a special function. In a window you can
show a list of the files on a disc, write a memo or a program, draw a picture, alter the
colours used for the screen display or perform other types of task. You can have
several windows open on the screen at once, and you can even be doing something
different in each of them at the same time. Windows are described further in the
section Using windows.
Icons The icons which appear on the icon bar represent things available for use on the desktop. If you want to do
something, or examine the contents of a filing system, you look at the icon bar to see
if its icon is available. If it is, you can select it and a window containing the activity
you want is opened.
The Archimedes desktop 14

The icons on the left of the icon bar represent the information storage facilities - that
is, the discs and other places where you can load information from, and save it to. At
least one will appear on the icon bar:
Floppy disc drive. The Archimedes computer uses 3.5 inch floppy discs, loaded into
the drive slot on the front panel. You can save (store) information by copying it from
the computer's memory onto a floppy disc, and retrieve it later by loading it back into
the computer from the disc. Floppy discs are described in the chapter Disc drives.
There may also be:
Hard disc. If you have a hard disc, 'a hard disc icon will also appear in the lower left
hand corner.
Econet. If your computer is fitted with a card for an Econet local area network,
there will also be an Econet icon.
On the right hand side are the applications icons. These represent things you can do,
such as word-processing and drawing programs. Initially only two are 'loaded:
Palette. This enables you to change the colours or grey scales on the screen,
depending on your monitor type.
Task manager. This enables you to switch from the desktop to the operating system
and other tasks, and to look at and control the allocation of your computer's memory (
more information on this is given in the chapter Outside the desktop - it will be of
interest to experienced users.)
The Archimedes desktop 15

The mouse and pointer The mouse moves the pointer around the screen. The buttons on the mouse are used to
select or adjust items you are pointing at on the screen, or to display menus. Using the
mouse is explained in the next chapter.
Menus A menu is a list of tasks or other options from which you can choose what you want to
do next. Menus are an easy way of making a selection - you don't usually have to type
anything, you just point at what you want, then select it. See the chapter Menus for
more details.
The Archimedes desktop 16

Using the mouse
This chapter tells you how to hold and move the mouse, and how to carry out the different mouse techniques
used in the desktop. If you have any difficulties making it work, turn to the chapter "If things go wrong".
The mouse is used to select, move and adjust items displayed on the screen. It is your
principal means of communicating with the Archimedes desktop.
As you move the mouse, the pointer on the screen moves correspondingly. Try it and
see:
Holding the mouse Hold the mouse with the cable away from you so that your fingers rest easily on the
three buttons. If you are right-handed, you should hold it like this:
Move the mouse around and watch the pointer move around the screen. If you run out
of space to move the mouse, lift it up and put it down again in a more convenient
spot. While the mouse is lifted, the pointer will not move, and when you put it down
again you can carry on where you left off.
Using the mouse 17

The select button is used most of the time to select icons displayed on the screen.
Pressing the menu button usually makes a menu appear. Menus are
described in the chapter Menus.
The adjust button is not often used - the Menus chapter includes one instance. Try
using the select button first when you want to alter something.
Mouse techniques Normally, you press the mouse button just once and then release it immediately. This is
called clicking.
Two other mouse techniques are also used:
double-clicking - pressing and releasing twice in quick succession. This is used to
initiate an action, or to load an application, for example.
dragging - to move an icon from one place to another.
Clicking and dragging techniques are summarised on the next page.
Using the mouse 18

Clicking
1. Point at the icon Move the mouse so that the pointer is
over the item you want to select.
For example, point at the desktop colour
palette icon on the icon bar.
2. Click on the mouse Click once on the left hand button of the
mouse.
3. The item will be selected The palette will appear on the screen.
Dragging
1. Point at the icon Move the mouse so that the pointer is
over the item you want to move.
For example, point at the title bar along the
top of the palette window.
2. Select it with the Press and hold down the left button of the
mouse mouse:
3. Move the mouse and Move the mouse to drag the object across
drag the icon the screen. Release the mouse button
when it is where you want it to be.
Using the mouse 19

More practice with the One of the icons on the icon bar is the palette, mentioned in the mouse
mouse techniques procedures. This lets you alter the colours used in the screen
display. Click on the palette icon to display the palette on the screen:
Now click on the third colour block on the top row. The colour block is
outlined, and the number 2 appears in it:
Colour number 2 is used to display the title bar along the top of the
window.
The bars at the top of the colour selection panel will have changed to show
the proportions of red, green and blue which make up that colour. You can
adjust the colour of the title bar by either dragging or clicking anywhere in
the colour bars.
Using the mouse 20

Move the pointer somewhere in the middle colour bar, and press the left
mouse button. The bar will snap to the position of the pointer, and the colour
will change accordingly. Keep the button down, and drag the bar backwards
and forwards. Notice how the colour at the top of the window changes as you
do this - it works rather like a slider volume control on a stereo. By moving
the bar, you're adjusting the proportions of green in the colour of the title bar.
Try dragging the other bars, too, to see how different proportions of blue and
red change the colour of the title bar.
When you have practised this a bit, click on the cross in the top left of the
window. The palette disappears, but the new colour definitions are still used
until you change the colours again or switch off the computer.
That's clicking and dragging. If you want to know more about the colour
palette itself, see the User Guide.
Using the mouse 21

Using the mouse 22

Disc drives
This chapter tells you how to use and take care of your Archimedes discs and drives.
Floppy discs and hard Information and programs are stored on discs. There are two types of disc
discs floppy discs and hard discs.
The Archimedes personal workstation uses 3.5-inch floppy discs, which are loaded
into the computer as they are needed.
A hard disc is much faster and holds a lot more information than a floppy disc, and is
built into the computer. If your Archimedes model has a hard disc, its presence is
indicated by an amber light labelled H/DISC on the front panel of the computer.
Disc drives 23

Inserting floppy discs The floppy disc drive is the slot to the right of the computer unit. Insert discs
like this, with the label uppermost:
The disc clicks into place when it is fully inserted. Practise inserting one of
the Applications discs.
Ejecting floppy discs To eject a floppy disc from the computer, press the button below the disc
slot, but not if the yellow activity light is on, indicating that the drive is
still running.
The Applications suite Your Archimedes computer is supplied with an Applications suite on floppy
discs, which contain application programs, utilities and games.
It is advisable to make back-up copies of the discs before you use
them, just in case you delete something by mistake. The chapter The
Advanced Disc Filing System in the User Guide tells you how to make
back-ups.
Archimedes machines with hard discs are delivered with the Applications
suite on the hard disc.
Accessing information To gain access to the information contained on a floppy disc which has been
on discs inserted into the drive, or on a hard disc, click on the appropriate disc drive
icon on the icon bar:
Disc drives 24

The contents of the disc will be displayed in a window for you to see:.
Write-protecting floppy The Applications discs are supplied write-protected. This means that you cannot
discs change anything on the disc, delete anything by mistake, or save any new files to the
disc.
You write-protect a new disc by moving the plastic tab with your finger nail towards
the outside edge of the disc:
Disc drives 25

Looking after floppy You will build up a collection of discs as time passes. Label them so that you
discs always know which one holds the information you need. Store them carefully
and keep them away from:
• extremes of temperature
• strong magnetic fields
• dust, dirt, coffee, pets etc.
Don't open the metal shutter on the disc, as the disc surface is easily
contaminated by dust.
Looking after hard discs If your Archimedes computer is fitted with a hard disc, you'll have less
floppy discs to worry about, but you should take some additional precautions, as
follows:
• Never move the computer, or press Break or Reset, whilst the H/DISC
activity light is illuminated.
• If you have a 20MB hard disc, when you have finished your session, and
before you switch off, click on Dismount on the hard disc icon menu (see
Menus). This 'parks' the hard disc, and prevents damage being done to the
disc while it is switched off. You must make sure you do this before you
move an Archimedes computer fitted with a hard disc. Larger capacity
discs carry out this task automatically:
Disc drives 26

Windows
This chapter describes windows and explains how they can be moved, resized, hidden and closed. It describes
how to move through the contents of a document too large to display in a window all at once.
What is a window? A window is an area of the screen displaying an activity or application. Examples of
windows you have seen so far are the colour selection palette and the directory window,
displayed when you click on the palette and disc drive icons respectively.
Features of windows Most windows can be moved around the screen, hidden behind other windows, or closed
completely. Icons on the windows allow you to do these things. Some windows also
have icons which allow you to change their size.
Windows 27

Title bar Displays the title of the window. This may be the name of an application, or the name
of a document if you are editing text.
Back icon If you click on this, the window will be hidden behind any windows which overlap the
area it occupies. The effect is that of putting the window to the back of the 'pile' of
windows on the screen.
Close icon Clicking on the Close icon closes the window, removing it from the screen.
Toggle size icon This icon switches the window between full size and the last size displayed. (Full size
is either large enough to display the complete document, or so that the window fills the
screen. This alternating action is called toggling.)
Adjust size icon The Adjust size icon lets you drag the icon to alter the size and shape of the window.
Displaying some Put Applications disc 1 into the disc drive and then click on the disc drive icon
windows to display the directory window. The directory window shows the contents of the disc:
Click on the palette icon to bring the palette window up onto the screen as
well.
Practising manipulating Practise using the window icons to do the things described on the following
windows pages.
Windows 28

Dragging a window
1. Select the title bar Move the pointer onto the title bar and press the
select (LH) button.
2. Move the mouse Keep the button pressed, and drag the window.
3. Release the mouse Release the button when the window is
button where you want it to be.
Resizing a window
1. Select the window size Move the pointer to the window size icon
icon and press the select (LH) button.
Practise this on the Applications disc directory
window.
2. Drag the icon Keep the button pressed, and drag the icon to
change the size of the window.
3. Release the button Release the button when the window is the size you
want it.
Windows 29

Toggling window size
1. Select the toggle size Move the pointer over the toggle size icon
icon and click the select (LH) button.
Practise this on the Applications disc directory
window.
The window size will snap to nearly the width
of the screen.
Clicking on the icon again will reverse the
process.
Shuffling windows When you have a pile of windows on the
screen, you can get at the one you want by
sending windows to the back and bringing
them to the front:
If they are not already overlapping, drag one of the
windows on top of the other to practise this.
Bringing a window to the Click on the title bar to bring a window
front to the front.
Sending a window to the Click on the back icon to send a window
back to the back.
Windows 30

Closing windows
1. Select the close icon Position the pointer on the close icon and click
the select (LH) button.
For example, close the directory window.
The window will disappear from the screen.
If the window has some unsaved work in it (
some edits you have made to a document for
example), you will be asked whether, you want
to save the changes you made since you last
saved it.
Windows 31

Scrolling A window is so named because it often acts as a window through which you can view
something which may be much bigger. It allows you to see an area of a file, directory
or picture stored in the computer. The proportion of the file visible depends on the
size and shape of the frame. The area of the file you can see alters as you move the
frame around:
The technique of moving the window around a large file is called scrolling.
Windows 32

Most windows have scroll bars and scroll arrows to enable you to move the window
around a file:
Scroll bars
allow you to scroll the window over the
document (or directory or picture) you are
viewing.
The size of the slider shows what
proportion of the document is visible. (If
the slider occupies half of the length of
the scroll bar, half the document is
visible.) To display a different area of the
document, drag the slider along the scroll
bar.
Scroll arrows
are at each end of the scroll bar. Click on the arrow showing the direction you want
to move in - left, right, up or down.
Practising scrolling To load a file on which you can practise scrolling, put the disc Applications 2 in the
drive and click on the floppy disc drive icon. When the directory is displayed,
double-click on the Tunel icon, and a piece of music will appear in a window with
scroll bars.
Practise the scrolling techniques shown on the next two pages:
Windows 33

Scrolling line by line
1. Select the scroll arrow Position the pointer on the scroll arrow and
click on the select (LH) button to scroll one
line.
Hold the button down to continue scrolling.
Click on the adjust (RH) button to scroll back
the other way.
Scroll left or right, column by column, the
same way (on windows which have horizontal
scroll bars).
Scrolling screen by
screen
1. Select the shaded part Position the pointer on the shaded part of
of the scroll bar the scroll bar (above the slider to scroll up,
below the slider to scroll down), and click on
the select (LH) button.
The next windowful of the document will
appear.
Click on the adjust (RH) button to scroll back
the other way.
Windows 34

Moving through a file
1. Select the slider Position the pointer on the slider, press the
select (LH) button and keep it pressed down.
2. Drag the slider Drag the slider to display the part of the file
you want to view.
Move from one side of a document to the other
by using the horizontal scroll bars (if the
window has them).
Windows 35

Windows 36

Menus
This chapter tells you what menus are, how to display them and choose things from them, and how to type in
answers when the computer asks you to be more specific about what you want.
What is a menu? A menu in computer jargon is similar to a menu in a restaurant - it's a list of things to
choose from. Instead of having to remember what you can have, and how to ask for it,
you just point at what you want on the menu and select it. This is the main way of
doing things in the Archimedes desktop.
Using menus Click the middle mouse button to display a menu. The menu displayed will depend on
where the pointer is on the screen at the time, whether the icon has been selected, and
also on what you are doing at the time.
Use the directory window of Applications disc 1 to practise displaying menus.
Practise the menu techniques described on the following pages.
Menus 37

Displaying a menu
1. Point to the relevant Move the pointer over the window or icon
icon you want to work on.
For example, move the pointer over the
Applications disc 1 directory window.
2. Click on the middle The menu will be displayed.
mouse button
Note that the menu will change to apply to an
individual file in a directory window, if the
pointer is over the file name, or if you have
previously selected its icon by clicking on it.
Choosing from a menu
1. Select the menu item Move the pointer over the menu item you
you want want and click the select (LH) button.
The action requested will occur.
For example, point at the Select all option on the
Filer menu and click select.
The file icons in the directory window will all be
highlighted. Repeat the process, choosing Clear
selection to reverse it.
Use the adjust (RH) button if you want the
menu to stay on the screen - otherwise it will
disappear when you press the button.
Menus 38